Hey they're welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
And today we're going to keep talking about relative extrema.
So in the last video I said that to find the relative extrema of a graph there are two main steps.
So
to find
relative extrema
you need to do two main things.
Number one is find the critical points
of f of x and once again remember that critical points exist where the derivative is equal to zero or
it's undefined.
We know that already.
The second step is to actually classify
the relative extrema.
So remember we talked about relative maximums and relative minimums after we find the critical points
we need to know if that critical point represents a max a min or neither.
And the first way that we're going to learn how to classify relative extrema is with the first derivative
test.
Let's go into that right now.
All right.
So here we have it.
It's called the first derivative test.
It is a test to use to classify relative extrema.
And again it's not the only test.
There's another test called the second derivative test.
Look at that a little bit later and the first derivative test is actually pretty easy.
It tells you this for a critical number a so in other words if you find the numbers that make the derivative
equal to zero or undefined Those are your critical numbers.
And then what you're going to do is you're going to go ahead and grab your critical numbers to the term
and whether the points for that x value is a max a men or neither.
And in fact if you did a session on increasing and decreasing intervals this is going to be very similar.
It's similar because you have to test values Latin rite of the critical number and plug them into the
derivative.
Basically you grab your number 8 right and you put it in a number line.
And what you're going to do is just like increasing and decreasing intervals you're going to test to
the left and to the right.
So where you're going to do is you're going to grab one value that's less than your critical number
a.
And once has value that's greater than your critical number eight then you're going to plug in the test
values into the derivative and then classify based on the signs that you get if you pick 10 values and
you get positive on the left and negative on the right.
Then that point is a relative maximum.
All right moving forward.
Relative minimum.
So again if you grab your curricle number A and you test a value to the left of that and it gives you
a negative and then a value to the right of that.
And it gives you positive and that is a relative minimum.
And finally if you Tasher values to the left turn right and you get the same sign.
So you get either positive on the left and positive on the right or no right.
Or here.
Both negative on the left and negative on the right.
This means that it is neither a relative maximum nor a relative minimum.
So we just say neither.
Ok so just to summarize again this is very similar to what we did for increasing and decreasing intervals.
You find your critical numbers and then you test to the left of the critical number and to the rights
of the critical number and based on the signs that you get then you know how to classify it.
In fact let's move into the Monnick.
So that is very easy for you to remember which one is which
Right.
So here we have our mnemonic for the first derivative test.
Now what Midhat this mnemonic is not like the others.
No it's not a funny catch phrase or something else like that is just simply drawing.
And in fact this mnemonic is how I remember the first derivative rule.
All right.
So then a month access draw a mountain and a hole and look at the slopes.
See it doesn't even rhyme but it doesn't matter.
Again remember mnemonic is a device for remembering something.
And this is definitely how we're going to remember the first derivative test.
So like we said whether a point is a relative max or a relative men or neither depends on the signs
that you get to the left and right of the critical number.
So what we're going to do is we're going to draw a max.
So that is your mountain
and we're going to draw our men which is our whole.
So we have our max which would be up here then we would have our men which would be down here.
So we have those two.
All right.
And then remember the derivative measures the slope of the line tangent.
So what we're going to do as well we're going to draw a tangent line to the left and to the right of
the max and a tangent line to the left and to the right of the men.
So it's going to be something like this.
And this is tangent but not tangent to the actual max or min.
It's just tangent to the left or right and if we're going to draw another one like this which again
is supposed to be touching this point.
It's just a little bit close here and we'll do the same for the men so we have a tangent line to the
left and we have a tangent line to the right and you might be thinking What the heck is this.
Well here's where the mnemonic comes in.
Remember that the slope of a line can be either a positive or negative.
If it's going up like this one then the slope is positive and if it's going down then the slope is negative.
Same thing here just in this case it's the opposite.
If it's going down it's a negative and then if it's going up it's a positive.
I remember we do this from left to right always.
So it's very easy to see that this is going down and this is going up.
And then again from left to right this is going up.
And this is going down by the way this is not meant to be a next.
It's supposed to be a plus sign.
It's just at the same level as the line.
All right.
So for Max when you draw it and you draw the tangent lines and then you put a sign to each line and
you will notice that to the left of the max you have a plus and to the right you have a min and by the
same token to the left of a man you have a minus end to the right of the men you have a plus.
This right here tells you how to classify it.
Again
here is your critical number 8.
And basing this on the left it should be positive.
So all of this should be a positive and to the right according to this it should be a negative because
this negative is to the right.
So if you get this you know you're dealing with a max let's go for the men.
Again for the men the same thing to the left of the men you have a negative.
So if you have your critical number here used to minus on the left and to the right you have a positive.
So to the right you do a positive.
That's it.
All right.
So it is as easy as drawing the little mountain and then drawing tangent lines and base in the direction
of the tangent line so you'll know if it's positive going up or if it's negative going down and you'll
know what's on the left and what's on the right.
The same thing for the minute you draw your whole and then you draw tangent lines on the left and on
the right and then based on whether the slope of the line is going down or going up you'll know exactly
how it's supposed to be here.
And like we said in the last slide if it gives you the same sign on both sides.
So for example if you get positive on the left and positive on the right or negative on the left and
negative on the right same signs then it is neither.
But for this mnemonic all you need to do is draw these to the max and the minute and if it's neither
a max or a min it is neither.
Right because it can only be one of the three max men or neither.
So we've talked a lot.
Let's go ahead and do an example so you can put your mnemonic to use.